docs: add more context and figures to the data square layout spec (#1967)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: specs/src/specs/data_square_layout.md

    1. These transactions contain protobuf encoded [`sdk.Msg`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/types/tx_msg.go#L14-L26)s, which get executed atomically (if one fails they all fail) to update the Celestia state. The complete list of modules, which define the `sdk.Msg`s that the state machine is capable of handling, can be found in the [state machine modules spec](../specs/state_machine_modules.md). Examples include standard cosmos-sdk module messages such as [MsgSend](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f71df80e93bffbf7ce5fbd519c6154a2ee9f991b/proto/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/tx.proto#L21-L32)), and celestia specific module messages such as [`MsgPayForBlobs`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/proto/celestia/blob/v1/tx.proto#L16-L31)
1. Blobs: binary large objects which do not modify the Celestia state, but which are intended for a Celestia application identified with a provided namespace.

> We want to arrange this data into a `k * k` matrix of fixed-sized [shares](../specs/shares.md), which will later be committed to in [Namespace Merkle Trees (NMTs)](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/v0.16.0/docs/spec/nmt.md) so that individual shares in this matrix can be proven to belong to a single data root. `k` must always be a power of 2 (e.g. 4, 8, 16, 32, etc.) as this is optimal for the erasure coding algorithm.

Reviewer: [question] is `1` a valid square size? If yes, thoughts on 

```suggestion
We want to arrange this data into a `k * k` matrix of fixed-sized [shares](../specs/shares.md), which will later be committed to in [Namespace Merkle Trees (NMTs)](https://github.com/celestiaorg/nmt/blob/v0.16.0/docs/spec/nmt.md) so that individual shares in this matrix can be proven to belong to a single data root. `k` must always be a power of 2 (e.g. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc.) as this is optimal for the erasure coding algorithm.
```

1. By construction, the above two rules mean that non-blob data always precedes blob data in the row-major matrix, even when considering single rows or columns.
1. Data with different namespaces must not be in the same share. This might cause a small amount of wasted block space, but makes the NMT easier to reason about in general since leaves are guaranteed to belong to a single namespace.

Given these rules, a square may look as follows:

![](./figures/square_layout.svg)

Padding is addressed in the [padding section](#padding). Namespace C contains two blobs of two shares each while Namespace D contains one blob of three shares.

> ### Ordering

Reviewer: [nit] I'm surprised markdown lint didn't complain and ask for a newline before this heading

```suggestion

### Ordering
```

> The order of blobs in a namespace is dictated by the priority of the PFBs that payed for the blob. A PFB with greater priority will have all blobs in that namespace strictly before a PFB with less priority.

Reviewer: [optional] would it help to clarify that priority is based on fees?

Author: Yeah I can add that

To that end, we impose some additional rules onto _blobs only_: blobs must be placed is a way such that both the transaction sender and the block producer can be held accountable—a necessary property for e.g. fee burning. Accountable in this context means that

1. The transaction sender must pay sufficient fees for blob inclusion.
1. The block proposer cannot claim that a blob was included when it was not (which implies that a transaction and the blob it pays for must be included in the same block). In addition all blobs must be accompanied by a PayForBlob transaction.

> Specifically, a `MsgPayForBlobs` must include a `ShareCommitment` over the contents of each blob it is paying for. If the transaction sender knows 1) `k`, the size of the matrix, 2) the starting location of their blob in a row, and 3) the length of the blob (they know this since they are sending the blob), then they can actually compute a sequence of roots to _subtrees in the row NMTs_. Taking _the simple Merkle root of these subtree roots_ provides us with the `ShareCommitment` that gets included in `MsgPayForBlobs`. Using subtree roots instead of all the leafs makes blob inclusion proofs smaller.

Reviewer: [nit] after square size independent blob commitments, the msg sender no longer needs to know `k` or the starting location.

^ disregard, I see this is addressed later.

![](./figures/subtree_roots.svg)

Understanding 1) and 2) would usually require interaction with the block proposer. To make the possible starting locations of blobs sufficiently predictable and to make `ShareCommitment` independent of `k`, we impose an additional rule. The blob must start at an index that is either:

1. A multiple of the `SubtreeWidth`. 

> 2. A multiple of `k`, the size of the square. 

Reviewer: [blocking] I don't think the version of non-interactive default rules that are implemented cares about the square size. If it did, then interaction would be needed between the block proposer and the msg sender.

I just updated ADR-013 w/ clarifying details but I think this meant to refer to the minimum square size that could contain the blob (a.k.a `MinSquareSize(blob)`)

Author: In [`NextShareIndex`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/42433f34bce35741bb68e4ca29e3fc33e523211b/pkg/shares/blob_share_commitment_rules.go#LL51C13-L51C13) we pick the next spot as the minimum between the start of the next row and the current cursor + the `SubTreeWidth`

The `MinSquareSize(blob)` is something else but within `SubtreeWidth` function. Perhaps it does make sense to add it.

Author: Looking at `NextShareIndex` I'm a little confused now about if what it's doing makes sense

The `SubtreeWidth` is the length of the blob in shares, divided by the [`SubtreeRootThreshold`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/appconsts/v1/app_consts.go#L6) and rounded up to the nearest power of 2 ([implementation here](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/shares/non_interactive_defaults.go#L94-L116)). It is the width of the first mountain in a [Merkle Mountain Range](https://docs.grin.mw/wiki/chain-state/merkle-mountain-range/) as shown below.

![](./figures/subtree_width.svg)

> The `SubtreeRootThreshold` is an arbitrary versioned protocol constant that aims to put a soft limit on the number of subtree roots included in a blob inclusion proof, as described in [ADR013](../../../docs/architecture/adr-013-non-interactive-default-rules-for-zero-padding.md). A higher `SubtreeRootThreshold` means less padding and more tightly packed squares but also means greater proof sizes.

Reviewer: [optional][nit] to disambiguate with other types of proofs (i.e. bad encoding fraud proofs)

```suggestion
The `SubtreeRootThreshold` is an arbitrary versioned protocol constant that aims to put a soft limit on the number of subtree roots included in a blob inclusion proof, as described in [ADR013](../../../docs/architecture/adr-013-non-interactive-default-rules-for-zero-padding.md). A higher `SubtreeRootThreshold` means less padding and more tightly packed squares but also means greater blob inclusion proof sizes.
```

With the above constraint, we can compute subtree roots deterministically. For example, a blob of 172 shares and `SubtreeRootThreshold` (SRT) = 64, must start on a share index that is a multiple of 2 because 172/64 = 3. 3 rounded up to the nearest power of 2 is 4. In this case, there will be a maximum of 3 share of padding between blobs (more on padding below). The maximum subtree width in shares for the first mountain in the merkle range will also be 4 (The actual mountain range would be 43 subtree roots of 4 shares each).

## Padding

> Given these rules whereby blobs in their share format can't be directly appended one after the other, we use padding shares to fill the gaps. These are shares with all `0` bytes. Padding always comes after the blobs in the namespace. The padding at the end of the square (Tail Padding) is unique in that it belongs to it's own namespace. All other padding shares the namespace of the blob before it.

Reviewer: [blocking] in addition to tail padding, there is also reserved padding: https://celestiaorg.github.io/celestia-app/specs/shares.html#reserved-padding-share

[optional]

```suggestion
Given these rules whereby blobs in their share format can't be directly appended one after the other, we use padding shares to fill the gaps. These are shares with a particular format (see [padding](./shares.md#padding)). Padding always comes after all the blobs in the namespace. The padding at the end of the reserved namespace and at the end of the square are special in that they belong to unique namespaces. All other padding shares use the namespace of the blob before it in the data square.
```

Author: > there is also reserved padding

Is reserved padding doing anything helpful? i.e. why can't it just be the padding belonging to the last namespace in the set of reserved namespaces?

To that end, we impose some additional rules onto _blobs only_: blobs must be placed is a way such that both the transaction sender and the block producer can be held accountable—a necessary property for e.g. fee burning. Accountable in this context means that

1. The transaction sender must pay sufficient fees for blob inclusion.
1. The block proposer cannot claim that a blob was included when it was not (which implies that a transaction and the blob it pays for must be included in the same block). In addition all blobs must be accompanied by a PayForBlob transaction.

Specifically, a `MsgPayForBlobs` must include a `ShareCommitment` over the contents of each blob it is paying for. If the transaction sender knows 1) `k`, the size of the matrix, 2) the starting location of their blob in a row, and 3) the length of the blob (they know this since they are sending the blob), then they can actually compute a sequence of roots to _subtrees in the row NMTs_. Taking _the simple Merkle root of these subtree roots_ provides us with the `ShareCommitment` that gets included in `MsgPayForBlobs`. Using subtree roots instead of all the leafs makes blob inclusion proofs smaller.

> ![subtree roots](./figures/subtree_roots.svg)

Reviewer: [optional] I really appreciate the use of visuals but I think this diagram is a bit confusing b/c I don't think subtree 2 will ever actually be used.

Since the width of subtree root 1 is 2 shares, I think this diagram should have subtree root 2 over two shares and subtree root 3 over two shares.

Author: Yeah I see what you mean. That makes sense to me. Maybe I will try replicate the flow I have in the merkle mountain range diagram.

> Understanding 1) and 2) would usually require interaction with the block proposer. To make the possible starting locations of blobs sufficiently predictable and to make `ShareCommitment` independent of `k`, we impose an additional rule. The blob must start at an index that is either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Understanding 1) and 2) would usually require interaction with the block proposer. To make the possible starting locations of blobs sufficiently predictable and to make `ShareCommitment` independent of `k`, we impose an additional rule. The blob must start at an index that is a multiple of the `SubtreeWidth`.
```

> 1. A multiple of the `SubtreeWidth`.
> 2. A multiple of `k`, the size of the square.

Reviewer: [blocking] I don't think the blob must start at a multiple of `k` 

```suggestion
```

Author: It did. Whenever padding was large enough that it would overflow into the next row, instead of starting there we would start at the beginning of the row.

I cleaned it up but in a way this rule still holds. For the implementation, instead of making it a multiple of `k`, we say that the blob needs to be able to fit in a square and since the `SubtreeWidth` is the `BlobMinSquareSize` when the `SubtreeRootThreshold` is high, any transaction that take up greater than 1/4 of the square they will always start at a multiple of `k` instead of having padding that might be `2k` or even `4k` (depending on what the `SubtreeRootTheshold` was).

I guess what's changed is that the multiple of `k` is encapsulated in the logic that calculates the `SubTreeWidth` (if you see what I mean)

So what I will do is take your suggestion and say that it's just a multiple of the `SubtreeWidth` but then add another section explaining how the subtree width is calculated.

> The `SubtreeWidth` is calculated as the length of the blob in shares, divided by the [`SubtreeRootThreshold`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/appconsts/v1/app_consts.go#L6) and rounded up to the nearest power of 2 ([implementation here](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/shares/non_interactive_defaults.go#L94-L116)). If the `SubtreeRootThreshold` is greater than the minimum square size that the blob can fit in (i.e. a blob of 15 shares has a minimum square size of 4) then we take that minimum value. This value is used as the width of the first mountain in the [Merkle Mountain Range](https://docs.grin.mw/wiki/chain-state/merkle-mountain-range/) that would represent the `ShareCommitment` (as shown below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SubtreeWidth` is calculated as the length of the blob in shares, divided by the [`SubtreeRootThreshold`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/appconsts/v1/app_consts.go#L6) and rounded up to the nearest power of 2 ([implementation here](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/shares/non_interactive_defaults.go#L94-L116)). If the `SubtreeRootThreshold` is greater than the minimum square size that the blob can fit in (i.e. a blob of 15 shares has a minimum square size of 4) then we take that minimum value. This value is used as the width of the first mountain in the [Merkle Mountain Range](https://docs.grin.mw/wiki/chain-state/merkle-mountain-range/) that would represent the `SubtreeWidth` (as shown below).
```

![](./figures/subtree_width.svg)

The `SubtreeRootThreshold` is an arbitrary versioned protocol constant that aims to put a soft limit on the number of subtree roots included in a blob inclusion proof, as described in [ADR013](../../../docs/architecture/adr-013-non-interactive-default-rules-for-zero-padding.md). A higher `SubtreeRootThreshold` means less padding and more tightly packed squares but also means greater blob inclusion proof sizes.

> With the above constraint, we can compute subtree roots deterministically. For example, a blob of 172 shares and `SubtreeRootThreshold` (SRT) = 64, must start on a share index that is a multiple of 2 because 172/64 = 3. 3 rounded up to the nearest power of 2 is 4. In this case, there will be a maximum of 3 shares of padding between blobs (more on padding below). The maximum subtree width in shares for the first mountain in the merkle range will be 4 (The actual mountain range would be 43 subtree roots of 4 shares each). The `ShareCommitment` is then the merkle tree over the peaks of the mountain range.

Reviewer: [typo]

```suggestion
With the above constraint, we can compute subtree roots deterministically. For example, a blob of 172 shares and `SubtreeRootThreshold` (SRT) = 64, must start on a share index that is a multiple of 4 because 172/64 = 3. 3 rounded up to the nearest power of 2 is 4. In this case, there will be a maximum of 3 shares of padding between blobs (more on padding below). The maximum subtree width in shares for the first mountain in the Merkle range will be 4 (The actual mountain range would be 43 subtree roots of 4 shares each). The `ShareCommitment` is then the root of a Merkle tree where the leaves of the tree are the subtree roots.
```

Specifically, a `MsgPayForBlobs` must include a `ShareCommitment` over the contents of each blob it is paying for. If the transaction sender knows 1) `k`, the size of the matrix, 2) the starting location of their blob in a row, and 3) the length of the blob (they know this since they are sending the blob), then they can actually compute a sequence of roots to _subtrees in the row NMTs_. Taking _the simple Merkle root of these subtree roots_ provides us with the `ShareCommitment` that gets included in `MsgPayForBlobs`. Using subtree roots instead of all the leafs makes blob inclusion proofs smaller.

![subtree roots](./figures/blob_share_commitment.svg)

Understanding 1) and 2) would usually require interaction with the block proposer. To make the possible starting locations of blobs sufficiently predictable and to make `ShareCommitment` independent of `k`, we impose an additional rule. The blob must start at a multiple of the `SubtreeWidth`.

> The `SubtreeWidth` is calculated as the length of the blob in shares, divided by the [`SubtreeRootThreshold`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/appconsts/v1/app_consts.go#L6) and rounded up to the nearest power of 2 ([implementation here](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/v1.0.0-rc2/pkg/shares/non_interactive_defaults.go#L94-L116)). If the output is greater than the minimum square size that the blob can fit in (i.e. a blob of 15 shares has a minimum square size of 4) then we take that minimum value. This `SubtreeWidth` is used as the width of the first mountain in the [Merkle Mountain Range](https://docs.grin.mw/wiki/chain-state/merkle-mountain-range/) that would all together represent the `ShareCommitment` over the blob.

Reviewer: 👍 I think this is way clearer. Thanks for improving this!
